[[https://classroom.udacity.com/courses/ud007/lessons/872590121/concepts/last-viewed][ðŸ”—Lecture
on Udacity (30 min)]]

** Storage
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: storage
   :END:
Reasons we need it: * Files - Programs, data, settings * Virtual Memory

We care about: * Performance * Throughput - improving (not as quickly as
processor speed) * Latency - improving (very slowly, more so than DRAM)
* Reliability

Types we can use are very diverse * Magnetic Disks * Optical Disks *
Tape * Flash * ... etc.

** Magnetic Disks
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: magnetic-disks
   :END:
Multiple platters rotate around a spindle. A head assembly sits beside
these platters, and has a head that is used to read both sides of the
magnetic platter surface. Where the head is positioned on the platter is
called a track - this is the circle of data the head can access while in
that position as the platters rotate. A cylinder is the collation of the
same track across multiple platters. The head will move position which
allows access to other tracks.

#+caption: magnetic disks
[[https://i.imgur.com/CB5bwaK.png]]

The data will be organized into position order along a track, and
divided into sectors. Each sector contains a preamble, some data, and
some kind of checksum or error correction code.

Disk capacity then can be represented by the multiplication of: - number
of platters x 2 (surfaces) - number of tracks/surface (cylinders) -
number of sectors/track - number of bytes/sector

*** Access time for Magnetic Disks
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: access-time-for-magnetic-disks
    :END:
(If the disk is spinning already) - Seek Time - move the head assembly
to the correct cylinder - Rotational Latency - Wait for the start of our
sector to get under the head - Data Read - read until end of sector seen
by head - Controller Time - checksum, determine sector is ok - I/O Bus
Time - get the data into main memory

...plus a significant Queuing Delay (wait for previous accesses to
complete before we can move the head again)

*** Trends for Magnetic Disks
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: trends-for-magnetic-disks
    :END:

- Capacity

  - 2x per 1-2 years

- Seek Time

  - 5-10ms, very slow improvement (primarily due to shrinking disk
    diameter)

- Rotation:

  - 5,000 RPM \(\rightarrow\) 10,000 RPM \(\rightarrow\) 15,000 RPM
  - Materials and noise improvements
  - Improves slowly

- Controller, Bus

  - Improves at OK rate
  - Currently a small fraction of overall time

Overall performance is dominated by materials and mechanics, not
something like Moore's Law - so it is very difficult to rapidly improve
on this technology.

** Optical Disks
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: optical-disks
   :END:
Similar to hard disk platter, except we use a laser instead of a
magnetic head. Additionally, where a hard disk needs enclosing to keep
contaminants out, this is not as important on an optical disk. So being
open (insert/remove any disk) allows portability, as does
standardization of technologies.

However, improving this technology is not very easy because portability
requires standards that must be agreed upon, which takes time. Then
products still have to be made to address the new technologies, and will
take even more time to be adopted by consumers.

** Magnetic Tape
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: magnetic-tape
   :END:

- Backup (secondary storage)
- Large capacity, replaceable
- Sequential access (good for large sequential data, poor for virtual
  memory)
- Currently dying out

  - Low production volume \(\Rightarrow\) cost not dropping as rapidly
    as disks
  - Cheaper to use more disks rather than invest in new equipment and
    the tapes to use them (and USB hard drives)

** Using RAM for storage
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: using-ram-for-storage
   :END:

- Disk about 100x cheaper per GB
- DRAM has about 100,000x better latency

Solid-State Disk (SSD) * DRAM + Battery * Fast! * Reliable * Extremely
Expensive * Not good for archiving (must be powered) * Flash * Low Power
* Fast (but slower than DRAM) * Smaller Capacity (GB vs TB) * Keeps data
alive without power

** Hybrid Magnetic Flash
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: hybrid-magnetic-flash
   :END:
Combine magnetic disk with Flash * Magnetic Disk * Low $/GB * Huge
Capacity * Power Hungry * Slow (mechanical movement) * Sensitive to
impacts while spinning * Flash * Fast * Power Efficient * No moving
parts

Use both! * Use Flash as cache for disk * Can potentially power down the
disk when what we need is in cache

** Connecting I/O Devices
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: connecting-io-devices
   :END:
[[https://i.imgur.com/Jt1d7Xm.png]] Main point: Things closer to the CPU
may need full speed of the bus. Things farther away or naturally slower
(e.g.Â storage, USB) will not utilize as much of the speed, so are more
interested in standardization of the bus/controller technology, which
grows at slower rates.
